Good morning.
My name is Julio González.
I manage the type group at Apple.
I am very excited to
be here with you today.
I'm excited for two reasons.
I get to introduce to
you a new framework,
and believe it or not,
I'm excited because I got to
finally tell you about it.
See, we've been listening to your
feedback during this past few years.
You want to have a faster
way to layout text.
You want to have an easier
way to do so as well.
You want to have a font framework that is
unified and it's not all over the place.
Well, we've done so.
I am an active member of
the Carbon Developer List.
I usually answer questions
regarding text and fonts.
And a lot of the time,
I'm not the only one.
I'm the only one.
I don't like the answers that I give you.
Some of those are, stick to Quikdraw,
even though I know that
Quikdraw is a deprecated API.
Or, at times,
I give you an answer that says,
here's a bunch of Cocoa APIs that
you can use to do so,
even though I know that you can't or
it may not be possible for you to apply
this Cocoa solution to your application.
So,
You know, I sit back and I say, boy,
I really want to let those
people know about CoreText,
but I can't and I'm just,
that's why I'm so excited to be here
today and introduce to you CoreText.
So, today,
I'll give you a little
rundown of what CoreText is.
Then I'd like to take a step
back and take a look at the
whole text system in Mac OS X,
how things fit together
and where CoreText fits in.
Then we'll go and dive deep down
into CoreText and what it is,
look at some of its concepts, the APIs,
give you a demo, look at sample code.
Then leave you with some
thoughts and hopefully we'll
have some time for some Q&A.
So what is CoreText?
CoreText is a brand new text
layout engine for Mac OS X.
It also comprises a
comprehensive set of font API.
So I say it's new.
Well, it's not really new.
CoreText has been there since Tiger.
Some of you have noticed it.
I know so because you've told
me so on the developer list.
You asked me, what is it?
I said, well, wait.
During the Tiger timeframe,
the Cocoa and Carbon frameworks
made use of CoreText.
They started moving away from using
Atsui and using CoreText instead.
So it is a proven technology.
One of our goals when we set
out to design CoreText was
we really wanted fast layout.
We wanted to have really fast
text rendered on the screen.
So in the Tiger timeframe, as I said,
Cocoa and HIToolbox started using it.
And for example,
internal benchmarks for HIToolbox
show that draw theme text box is twice
as fast once they adopted CoreText.
So hopefully we can do the
same for your applications.
When we set out to do CoreText,
We had that performance in mind,
so we just took a step back and looked
at what we had to offer in the past and
the new things that we had in Cocoa,
plus a few other things
that we did internally.
And we created this unified framework for
you to use so you don't have to jump back
and forth between one API to the next.
And finally,
one of the main goals of CoreText was
to help out our Carbon developers.
A lot of them still use Quickdraw.
In fact, as of last week,
I'm answering questions of
Carbon developers that are
starting a brand new app
and they're using Quickdraw.
So hopefully with CoreText,
we've solved some of these problems,
given you an avenue to
move from Quickdraw into
something that is more modern.
So let's take a look
at the text subsystem.
So at the very bottom,
we have what we call the core frameworks.
First one is ATS, Apple Type Services.
You can't use it to draw
text or layout text.
But it's a...
A base framework that allows or vents
all the font data to the system.
Without it, the rest of the system,
you can't do, you can't draw any text.
Next one is Quartz.
It's our core rendering engine.
It is the bottleneck for all
text that is drawn in the system.
As such,
it is the fastest way to draw text.
So you say at this point in time, "Well,
Why should I be doing anything else?
I should just use Quartz." Well,
Quartz is just a rendering engine.
It really cares little about text.
It has no idea about text.
If you have the glyphs
that you want to display,
it will put those on the screen.
It will get those pixels
on the screen really fast.
But if you have any issues such
as text issues such as reordering,
kerning, ligatures,
it doesn't know anything about that.
For that, you need a text system.
So here's what the text system
looks as of the Panther timeframe.
Oldest of all is QD Text.
I love QD Text, Quickdraw Text.
Being the oldest,
it has the most handicaps.
It does not support all fonts.
It has no support for UniCode.
In OS X, it has a more limited support
of languages and scripts than it
did in the classic time frame,
and it's also the slowest to render.
If that's not enough, as of Leopard,
it will be the second release
where Quickdraw is deprecated.
And new to Leopard, 64-bit,
Quickdraw is not supported
at all in 64-bit.
Next is Atsui,
Apple type services for Unicode imaging.
This is a very powerful layout engine,
a very complete layout engine,
so much so that Cocoa uses Atsui
to do some of its text operations.
However,
it's a technology that predates Mac OS X.
As such, it has some really bad,
or I shouldn't say bad,
it carries some old technologies
with it such as Quickdraw.
So it creates some clashes, if you will,
when you try to use
these with modern APIs.
Aside from that,
folks that program with Atsui
Generally run into all these
obscure performance pitfalls.
And tasks that should be simple
to use in Atsui or simple to
do in Atsui are often complex.
If you take one of these boxes,
the box that says they're Atsui and
you want to draw that text Atsui,
it takes you half a
page of code to do so.
So these are some of the issues
that we've solved with CoreText and
hope to show you a little later on.
On top of ATSUI, we have Cocoa and MLTE.
MLTE, Multilingual Text Engine,
is a powerful framework.
However,
this framework is also old technology.
It predates Mac OS X,
and believe it or not,
it's even older than ATSUI.
As such, it has more baggage
that it carries around,
if you will.
Quickdraw text, Script Manager,
a lot more.
However,
it's a very easy-to-use framework.
And to draw the same text,
I'll give you the same example.
To draw MLTE there,
it probably takes you one or
two lines of code to do so.
So it is very nice in that respect.
Now, one note of caution for MLTE that
I want to bring up at this time.
For 64-bit and Leopard,
MLTE is not going to be fully supported.
The only APIs that will be
supported in 64-bit for MLTE are
those that make HI TextView work.
That's why in previous,
I think in the last WWDC,
we told you to start moving away from
MLTE and start using HI TextView instead.
Finally, there is Cocoa.
Cocoa is the best way and the
easiest way to draw text in Mac OS X.
It is the simplest and most
powerful way to do so in Waco S10.
And if at times,
if you don't find what you need in Cocoa,
you can possibly subclass one of its
classes and do what you need to do.
However,
we know full well that for a lot of you,
Cocoa is not an answer.
It doesn't fit into your architecture.
Or you need to be at a much more lower
level that Cocoa doesn't fit your needs.
For those, a lot of you folks have picked
at ZUI and that's great.
But now we have CoreText,
which is what we think
a much better solution,
a better performing solution,
easier solution for you to use.
Now,
here's the text architecture in Tiger.
As you can see, the Cocoa arrow that was
pointing to Atsui is now gone,
indicating the first transition
from Cocoa to using CoreText.
And also notice the arrow going from
Cocoa down to the base frameworks,
ATS and Quartz.
In the Leopard timeframe,
that arrow is gone.
Now, what do I mean about that?
It doesn't mean that Cocoa no longer uses
the base frameworks to do its things.
But what it means is that it's using
much less and relying much more so
on CoreText in the Leopard timeframe.
Also notice here the
new arrow from Carbon to
CoreText indicating that finally,
Carbon developers can make
use of the new technology.
And finally,
the coloring for MLT and QD text
indicating a warning that they're
not supported or in the case of MLT,
there's little support in 64-bit.
So, now you can see CoreText is sort of
living in between those two layers,
in between the Carbon Cocoa layer
and the Frame layer,
being the layer where most
of the core layout operations
are going to go through.
So what is CoreText?
Now you need to know what is
it that it really does for you.
So I told you before
there is two facets to it.
There is the layout and the font API.
I will talk to you about the font API,
but before I do that,
I want to introduce Ned Holbrook,
who will tell you all about the
layout capabilities of CoreText.
Thank you Julio.
Good morning.
I'm very excited to be here with
you and tell you about performing
text layout with CoreText.
So, as Julio mentioned,
CoreText is newly public in the
Leopard timeframe and as such,
if you have taken the opportunity
to look at your developer seed,
you'll see the full range
of CoreText headers that
you have available to you.
Has anyone taken a look at those yet?
Okay, that's good.
Because there's,
it may look daunting at first and
so what I'd like to do is walk you
through sort of the higher level
objects that we have available to you
in CoreText and how you might use them
appropriately to do what you need.
So, in order to do so,
We should first answer the question,
well, why should I even care?
Well, we've tried to give you several
different reasons why you will
be interested in CoreText,
and so I'd like to
discuss some of those now.
The first is that CoreText is
a modern API design.
Not only does CoreText make extensive
use of system services internally,
but it also makes use of the very
same conventions used elsewhere
in frameworks for Mac OS X.
So this means that a lot of the
rules of thumb that you've garnered
for yourself over the years working
with OS X technologies can be put
to the same use with CoreText,
which means that you can spend
less of your time fighting the
API and more of the time getting
stuff accomplished with CoreText.
Cortext is fast.
This was a big concern for a lot of
you with some previous architectures
rendering engines on Mac OS X.
And as Julio mentioned,
we found internally that Cortext
is up to twice as fast than Atsui,
so we hope you'll be
very excited about that.
CoreText makes use of
core foundation objects.
Not only does it use core
foundation objects as
parameters to various functions,
but CoreText itself is a collection
of core foundation objects.
So I'll be talking about these
objects in the next 25 minutes or so,
but what you should know
is that once you have a
CoreText object in your possession,
then you can go ahead and follow the
same create rule that you've learned
when dealing with core foundation,
and so you can retain and release
those objects as necessary,
which is great.
CoreText has both Quartz
and Cocoa integration.
Now, I suppose integration isn't
exactly the right word to use.
I think I was looking for
a word closer to synergy.
But basically what this means is that,
as Julio mentioned,
Quartz is the only way to get text
drawn on Mac OS X at the lowest level.
And so obviously,
Quartz is making use of Quartz.
But in addition, as you'll see,
for those of you who need access
to the lowest level of information,
we've provided that to you in a form
that is directly usable by Quartz.
So there aren't any expensive type
conversions that you'll need to do or
that need to be done internally even in
order to make use of that information.
And for Cocoa, of course,
since Quartz is a core file,
a file that's not
necessarily a core file,
it's a core file that's not
necessarily a core file.
So we've provided that to you in a
form that is directly usable by Quartz.
So there aren't any expensive type
conversions that you'll need to do or
that need to be done internally even in
order to make use of that information.
And for Cocoa, of course,
since Quartz is a core file,
a very common file that's
not necessarily a core file,
but it's a core file, a core framework,
it doesn't require the use of
any higher level framework,
be it Carbon or Cocoa.
But if you are making use of Cocoa,
there are a couple of instances
where we've been able to
streamline the process of doing so.
And so if you are programming
in a Cocoa application,
it'll be really easy to get
information into Quartz,
and I'll show you how.
The most important thing on this slide
and the thing I want you to remember is,
like Julio said, simple tasks are simple.
And frequently these are the most common
operations you're going to need to do.
If you want to draw a simple
paragraph of text on screen,
you shouldn't have to write a bunch
of code in order to do so because,
hey, everybody needs to do it.
So with CoreText,
we've made those simple tasks,
those common operations, very easy to do.
And I'll be showing you several
examples of how to do so.
And finally,
CoreText is easy to optimize.
Well, what exactly do I mean by this?
Well, with ATSUI,
there are cases where calling
one function could cause a
performance degradation elsewhere
in a different ATSUI function,
and it wasn't always very obvious,
even to us Apple engineers,
when those cases were going to be.
And so with CoreText,
we've tried to make the processing
that we've done more transparent,
so you'll be able to look at a piece
of code using CoreText and make a very
accurate prediction as to where the
time in your application is going to
be spent for large amounts of text.
And so we think that this will make
you a lot more interested in using
CoreText since you won't have to
worry about those issues since you'll
be able to see it all up front.
And since it's so fast to start, then,
well, you're off on a good foot already.
So to start,
I figured it wouldn't be fair
to let you get through a session
without having some sort of demo.
And so I'm going to show you what the
operation that we call frame setting,
but you probably know as
simple multi-line text layout.
Okay, so with this example,
I have a couple of text
documents on screen,
and let me bring those up now.
So for those of you
who can read this text,
you'll see that they're not exactly
the world's most engrossing documents,
but they do have some interesting
characteristics that I just
want to point out quickly.
Both of these documents
are regular RTF files,
and I'm showing them
in TextEdit right now.
And so you'll see this first one
with WWDC at the top has a couple
of interesting characteristics.
It's set in two different languages.
I've got the same text
on here in Japanese.
And you'll note that there are tab
stops around these bullet points here.
In this other document,
which is the text of
the French Constitution,
you'll see that there's a large
amount of text in this document,
and that it also makes use of
some various fonts and styles
here for simple formatting.
And so we have two documents that
are looking great in TextEdit,
and so I've written a demo
application that I'd like to
show you CoreText with now.
So this demo example that I've
written is basically a very,
very simple Cocoa application,
but really what I'm making
use of Cocoa here is for its
RTF reading capabilities.
And so there's nothing in this
demo that's inherently tied
to the use of Cocoa with the
exception of the RTF reading,
but basically what I've done
is created a custom view using
CoreText to do text layout.
So anything you can do
with Cocoa using CoreText,
of course, Carbon is available also,
and we'll be making samples available
to you using both of those frameworks.
So let's go ahead and open up both of
these documents in my application here.
Now, as I noted,
I simply made a custom view
here that uses CoreText to
do the layout of this text.
And the first thing you'll notice
is that both these documents
have their formatting preserved,
which is great,
because all I did was just
ask for the RTF to be parsed,
and now I'm using CoreText to render it,
and it looks great out of the box.
One of the other features that I added
to this view is that when I click on it,
I can change the number of columns
that the text is displaying in.
And so in this example,
I have that large document,
and I'm displaying it in three columns.
And one thing you'll notice is
that besides the formatting,
which is the same as it was before,
it's still smooth and responsive
even for three columns of text.
Thank you.
Could we switch back to the slides?
So really, at this point,
this demo is just smoke and mirrors.
And so I thought what I'd do is show
you the code that it took to actually
draw that view using CoreText.
And so you can think of what
needed to be done there.
Basically,
we have the bounding box of the view.
And in that last example,
we went ahead and determined
what the boxes for the three
columns in that view were.
And so once we have those boxes
determined for each column,
I'll show you the code that was needed
in order to draw the text using CoreText.
Well, that's it.
You'll see at the top there's a
for loop for each of the columns
that I'm going to be drawing.
Now, at this point,
I don't expect you to know what the
classes are that we're dealing with here.
What I do want to point
out is how simple this was.
Simply for each path for the box
that we're drawing text into,
we're going to create a frame,
we're going to draw it,
and if there's any more,
we're going to move on to the next.
And that's all there is to it.
So you can imagine for
a simple box of text,
all you need are those first two calls,
which is fantastic because I need to
set text in boxes quite frequently,
and so we've tried to make
it as easy as possible.
So in the next few slides,
I'm going to explain to you exactly what
these classes are that I'm dealing with,
so don't worry about that now, but again,
fast and easy with CoreText.
So now I'm going to kind of give you
the roadmap to the CoreText headers that
you have available in your Leopard Seed.
But to do so,
first I just want to have one aside
to talk about some terminology.
And that is that since CoreText is
a UniCode text layout engine,
we do have to touch on UniCode
terminology for this process.
And that is that there's a distinction
between characters and glyphs.
Now, characters are the numeric input,
the actual values of the characters
that we're going to layout.
And glyphs,
those are the graphical entities
that actually are used to
display the text on screen.
Now, as Julio pointed out,
Quartz doesn't really know text.
All it knows are glyphs.
And so what people need is a way to
get from the text that they have,
along with any style
information they might have,
such as font sizes or colors or whatever,
and convert them into the appropriate
glyphs for drawing that text on screen.
And so that is the process
that CoreText provides to you,
is that text layout process.
And so when I, if I refer to text as
having been laid out,
then what we are dealing
with are the glyphs that are
appropriate for use by Quartz.
So to start with,
to give you this roadmap to find out how
to dive into CoreText and make use of it,
we should start by talking
about a fundamental class,
which is the attributed string.
Now, when I say fundamental,
I don't mean that CoreText implements
an attributed string class,
but rather it is vital to
CoreText because this is the
input type for all of the layout
operations performed by CoreText.
So you have two choices for classes
to use for an attributed string.
There's CF attributed string
and NS attributed string.
As the names imply, they're very similar,
and in fact,
they're what we call toll-free bridged,
which means that any time you
see a function that takes one of
these classes as a parameter type,
then the other can be
used interchangeably.
So really then it comes down to how you
choose to construct these objects and/or
where you may have gotten them from.
But both of these objects are
the same in their function,
and that is to store the text
and the style information that's
associated with that text.
And so if you look in
the CoreText headers,
you'll see that we provide a list
of various attribute names for
styles to which CoreText responds.
And so basically each of these classes,
for those of you who
aren't familiar with it,
and I'm sure many of you
have seen these before,
for each range of text it has associated
with it a dictionary of keys and values.
And those keys are the attribute
names and the values are,
for instance, for a font attribute name,
it would be the font object
itself corresponding to that text.
So one note on bridging here.
So in that example that I showed you,
what I got from the RTF conversion
was an NS attributed string that
contained all the style information
for the text I was drawing.
CoreText does make available to you its
list of attributes that it responds to.
But of course,
it would be rather a nuisance if
you had an NS attributed string
and you needed to convert from,
say,
NS font attribute name to our version,
the KCT font attribute name.
And so we have taken the
opportunity to bridge the most
commonly used Cocoa attributes.
And so for those of you who are using
CoreText within a Cocoa application,
this is one of those steps we've taken
in order to make that integration
simple and painless for you.
So let's get on to what is
actually in CoreText now.
And the first object or class that I want
to talk to you about is the frame setter.
[Transcript missing]
Well,
the Framesteader internally makes use of
a class referred to as the typesetter,
and this is really the heart of CoreText.
The typesetter is the class that
is responsible for performing
the layout operation itself.
So once you've supplied
CoreText with an attribute of string,
you've given it the text and the
styles that it needs in order
to determine which glyphs are
appropriate for drawing that text.
And so the typesetter is the class
that actually does that for you.
And so internally,
the typesetter is the Framesteader,
excuse me.
The Framesteader is making use of
a typesetter in order to determine
the actual text to be drawn,
but you also have the
opportunity to use it directly,
which is fantastic because, well,
it comes in handy.
The typesetter has a couple of other
functions besides its core function,
and those other functions are to
suggest line breaks and to create lines.
Now, the process of suggesting
a line break is simple.
It says, for a given amount of space,
how much text can I fit on a
single line within that space?
And so the typesetter is responsible
for determining what the appropriate
length of -- what the appropriate
length for a line is given a width,
and it can do so by the
most common word break,
word wrapping,
or there's also an opportunity
to get finer-grained,
cluster breaks, but the default is,
of course, to do simple word wrapping.
And finally,
the typesetter creates lines.
Now, I alluded to this when I was
talking about line breaking,
but what is a line?
Well, a line is the object of
core currency in CoreText.
It is the object that holds
the glyphs that are the result
of the text layout process.
And so any individual line can
correspond to a range of characters
within an attributed string.
And so you might imagine that
a line can encompass the entire
string that you provided it with,
which could be miles long, really,
or it can correspond to individual
lines within a paragraph,
as you've seen.
And so these line objects can be
created from several different sources.
As I mentioned, the frame setter,
which will create lines for you,
has an array of lines
corresponding to the text in the
box that you asked it to fill.
The line can also be
created from the typesetter.
So, for instance,
in a line breaking example,
and I've got a slide on
this in just a few seconds,
you'll ask a typesetter to create a
line from a known range of characters.
And in addition,
we realize that multi-line text
layout is not something that
you're always going to need to do.
And there are cases when you
need just a simple label of text
or a single line that you know.
And so in that case,
there's a convenience method
offered by the line for creating
what we call a freestanding line.
The result is the same,
but the upside is that you don't need to
manage creating the typesetter yourself.
And so this is another way
where we've tried to make
your life a little bit easier.
Once you have a line,
there are several operations that
you can perform with that line.
One of the most common operations
is the process of determining
the flushness of that line,
which you might also
know of as alignment.
So given a particular line,
then if I know that I'm going
to draw it into a certain space,
I might want it to be, say,
right flush or aligned right.
And so a line can give you the
information that you need in
order to draw it in the correct
position for that flushness.
A line can also create a justified
or a truncated version of itself,
which is great when you need to
perform either of those operations.
Most commonly, though,
you'll probably be asking the
line for various measurements.
And there are two major types of
measurements that we provide from
the line object using CoreText.
The first is something we call the
typographic bounds of the line,
and the second is the
image bounds of the line.
Now the typographic bounds is
what you'll be using when you're
dealing with lines of text.
And those are the common measurements
that you'll need to know how to place
those lines relative to each other.
And those are measurements,
the ascent and descent
of the line as a whole,
and the width,
the typographic width of that line.
So for text,
those are the most appropriate
measurements to be using.
But there are others of you who are using
text as sort of a graphical element,
really.
And so what you need to know is,
you know,
I'm going to be using this text as an
object in a graphic that I'm drawing,
and so what is it exactly?
And so the image bounds for a given
line are defined as the rectangle
that -- the smallest possible
rectangle that encloses all of
the glyphs in that particular line.
And so if you don't need to deal
with the ascent and descent of
the text and you want to know
the actual coverage of that line,
then the image bounds are for you.
And finally, the line object,
like the frame object, is ready to draw.
So since we designed CoreText to
be an immediate image,
and we're going to be
using CG adjunct to Quartz,
we use the same placement
strategy as Quartz for text.
And that is that the origin of a line
of text is on the baseline of the text.
And so as you would in Quartz,
to figure out where to put this line,
you simply set the text position
in a CG context and then have the
line draw itself into that context.
So it's very simple.
So as I mentioned at
the start of this talk,
we tried to make common
operations very easy to do.
And so I'd like to spend a few
lines now talking about those common
examples I gave you and how you
can actually do them with CoreText.
So we're going to take
a look at some code now,
but I don't think it's too much.
The first of these operations is the
process of drawing a simple paragraph.
And this is essentially the heart
of that first slide of code I gave
you earlier on as part of my demo.
And so in all these examples,
I'm going to assume that you've
already figured out some things
that are important to the particular
application of this process.
And so in this case,
we'll have an attributed string.
We'll have a path that corresponds
to the box in which we're going
to want to draw this text.
And we have the CG context itself.
So I'll assume that we've set those up.
Now once we have those,
we go ahead and create
a framesetter object,
CTFramesetterCreateWithAttributedString.
And this will give you that object then
that is responsible for doling out those
frame objects that I talked to you about.
And so in this example,
we're simply going to fill
a single box with text.
And so with that framesetter,
we simply ask it to create us a frame.
And then once we have that frame,
we can draw that frame
into the CG context.
So I will point out that in
the examples that I'm giving,
you should note that I've,
in addition to leaving out the
initialization of those variables,
I've also left out the very
necessary calls to CF release.
But it shouldn't be difficult to
figure out where you need to put
those because we followed the example.
And so what I've done is left off the
calls to CF release in these examples.
But don't forget.
So that's all it takes for a paragraph.
The other common example I gave is
using just text as a label within
a graphic or perhaps you know that
you have a limited amount of text.
And this next one is a
little bit more complicated,
but that's only because I actually
show you how to create the
attributed string itself.
So again at the top we're going
to start with some things.
We've got a string.
This is just a plain old CFString.
And we've got a font,
which we're going to talk
about in just a second.
And we've got our CG context again.
So then in order to create
the attributed string,
for those of you who
are unfamiliar with it,
what we're going to do is we're going to
make the dictionary of those key value
pairs that define the style attributes.
And so in this case there's
only one style that I'm
going to apply to my string.
So in this case I know that
I have a particular font that
I want to draw the string from.
And of course being a good
programmer I got this string
from a localized string.
So I'm going to call this strings
file or nib or however you've
chosen to localize your application.
And so I'm going to apply the font
to it by creating an attributed
string with those attributes.
And then once I've done that,
now we can actually get into
the core text part of things.
And that is we're going to create,
as I mentioned, this freestanding line,
which is this convenience.
So CT line create with attributed string.
Once we have that line we can use
either of those measurement capabilities
I talked about a couple slides back.
Either the typographic bounds or the
image bounds to figure out where I'm
going to put this in my CG context.
And once I've done so I set my
text position and I draw the line.
So again, very easy.
This example is a bit cluttered,
but that's only because
of this stuff up here.
But this should be old
hat to most of you.
So now there's one more example
that I'm going to walk you through,
and that's the process of line breaking.
Now, most of you,
or I should say in many cases,
you won't need to go through this
process yourself because we've
already provided the frame object for
dealing with simple boxes of text.
But you may find that in your
application you have more
advanced line breaking needs.
Maybe you have a special hyphenation
mechanism or some other sort of process
that you need to do when breaking lines.
And so what I've done here is I'm
going to replicate the process
of filling a frame and show you
what's necessary so that if you have
one of those more advanced needs,
then you can use this as a framework
for doing what you need to do.
So to start with, again,
we're going to have several variables
that are set up as appropriate.
In this case, we have the width,
which is,
we'll assume it's the width of the box
in which we're going to set this text.
And then we have our CG context,
of course.
And then we have our text position.
It's likely that you might not
have figured this out up front.
Maybe we'll figure it out later on.
But again,
I'll leave it as an exercise to
the reader to figure out what
the text position is appropriate
for this particular need.
Once you've initialized those variables,
then we're going to start again
with the heart of the process
by creating a typesetter.
So the typesetter then is going to
take this attributed string and it's
going to do some initial processing
on that to determine which glyphs are
going to be used to draw that string.
And so then the process of filling
this box with text then is going
to be simply determining what each
of those lines are in that box.
And we can do that by asking
the typesetter to create or to
suggest a line break for us.
And so in this example,
I'm going to start with
the very start of the text,
the very first character
in my attributed string.
And so that's my start variable,
which is the offset
into the string itself.
And I've got a width.
I know the width of the box
that I'm trying to fill.
At this point, I'm trying to figure out
what the first line is.
And so I'm going to ask the typesetter
to suggest a line break for me.
And what the typesetter is going
to do is it's going to return to
us the number of characters that
are appropriate for fitting in
that -- on that first line of text.
And so this is taking into
account things like hard breaks.
And in this case, suggest line break,
of course,
is the default method of word wrapping.
So it will give you the
number of characters.
It'll work out just great.
And then once you've
gotten that information,
then you can use the starting offset,
which is zero for our first line,
and then the number of characters in that
first line to actually create the line.
And so this is a pretty
simple process at this point.
And so we've determined -- we've
determined what the text is
going to fit on the first line
of this particular paragraph is.
Now, I've decided to spice
things up just a little bit.
And I'm going to draw
this first line centered.
Okay, slow down.
Okay.
So we're going to determine
the flushness of this line.
In CoreText,
we indicate flushness or alignment,
as I mentioned,
as a floating point value between 0
being left flush and 1 being right flush.
And so in this case, of course,
0.5 seems just right for centered text.
And so what I'm going to do is
I'm going to ask the line to
tell me where I need to move,
how much I need to move
my pen position by,
basically, in order to draw it perfectly
centered within my known width.
And so once I have that offset,
then I can go ahead and
update my text position in my
CG context and then draw my line.
So, one thing I want to point out
is that once I've asked the
typesetter to suggest a line break,
this is a point in the process
where you have some flexibility.
So, for instance,
if you were dealing in a situation where
you needed to prohibit a line break
between certain words in your text,
then that's the point where you
don't necessarily have to take
the suggestion right off the bat.
You could confer with your own
information and adjust that as necessary
for your needs and then go ahead and
create the line based on the suggestion
but also some additional input.
So, you have a lot of
flexibility in this process.
So, at this point,
we've drawn our first line.
In this case, we've drawn it centered.
And so, in order to move on and find
out what the next line in the
box we're going to be drawing,
we simply increment the starting
position by the number of characters
that we had in our first line.
And then we'll go back up and ask
the typesetter to suggest a line
break for the next line in the box.
And so, that is, in a nutshell,
the process of line
breaking text with CoreText.
Now, again,
this is going to be very helpful to
those of you who have specific needs
when dealing with line breaking.
But in many cases,
we expect that the framesetter will
be all that's necessary in order to
deal with multiple lines of text.
So, you have,
in addition to being very easy,
you have a lot of
flexibility in this process.
So now there's one more class I'm
going to talk to you about today.
And this is another
instance where many of you,
or for many of your needs,
you won't need to make use of this last
class because we think that in general
dealing with lines and dealing with
frames are much easier than dealing with
the nitty-gritty details of the actual
glyphs when dealing with UniCode layout.
But there are those of you who do
need access to that information.
Perhaps you're going to perform
some graphical operation,
some sort of, you know,
mask or fill or whatever
on particular glyphs.
Basically, you have need to read the
information about the glyphs
themselves from the layout process.
And so for those of you,
we make available to you
individual glyph runs.
So the glyph run is the smallest possible
storage container for a run of glyphs.
And so it contains the actual glyphs,
their positions.
And for each run,
you also have access to a dictionary
of the style attributes that
pertain to the glyphs in that run.
Now, each run is the result of having
grouped glyphs by their attributes.
And so in addition to those style
attributes that you can get from
the dictionary for each run that is
uniform for all the glyphs in that run,
there are also occasionally
attributes that are not.
And so you can see that the glyphs are
actually grouped by their attributes
that are intrinsic to the text itself.
So for instance, if you're dealing with
right-to-left text,
of course,
the glyphs for a range of right-to-left
text need to be swapped in turn.
And so we may have made a
particular grouping of glyphs
based on directionality,
for instance.
So there are various reasons
why that might happen.
But you can be assured that
the attributes for each run
correspond equally to all of the
glyphs in that particular run.
As with the line, you can use the run to
obtain measurements.
Again,
we offer both the typographic bounds,
which is ascent, descent,
and also the image bounds if
you need to make use of that.
[Transcript missing]
Those are the basic objects
that we expect you to be
dealing with in CoreText.
And there are a number of
other functionality groupings
available to you in CoreText.
And so I haven't given you
an overview of every class,
but like Core Foundation,
we've organized things
by class in our headers.
And so you know where to look now
to find out how to get started.
But before you do so,
I do want to leave you some
parting thoughts here for
this section of the talk.
And
The first of these points that I want
to mention is that we hope that you'll
choose the right tool for the job.
Now, in general,
this means that you can take advantage
of these higher-level classes,
in particular the frame setter,
for instance,
if you want to deal with paragraphs.
And that way it's less hassle to
you because it's much less code than
delving down into the lower levels and
so much less opportunity for mistakes.
And I know I make a lot,
so I try to go as high as possible.
In addition,
if you're using a higher-level
class in CoreText,
it does take any opportunity
it can to optimize operations
based on knowledge that it has.
And so in some cases,
asking a frame setter to do
something might be slightly
faster than doing it yourself,
but we're just trying to help.
But once you have picked which
class you're going to deal with,
as I mentioned,
Framesetter for paragraphs,
Typesetter if you want to do
things on individual lines,
and Align if you're just dealing
with a known amount of text,
we encourage you to reuse those objects.
We expect that you've become used to
reusing your core foundation objects,
and that's one of the reasons
we've made it easy to reuse
CoreText objects as well.
But of course,
anytime you create an object,
there's a certain amount of
work associated with that.
And so,
so long as you know that you can make use
of that same work over and over again,
you can go ahead and retain that
or stick it in a CF collection
class if you need to.
But hang on to it for as long
as you can make use of it,
and then when you're done with it,
CF release it, and it'll be great.
There is sort of one bugaboo
that I have to talk about,
and that is that you may find
yourself using CoreText within
a larger application framework.
And in particular,
you may find yourself drawing
into a CG context that isn't
one that you've created.
So it's kind of like the
dollar you found on the street.
It spends like real money,
but you're not sure
exactly where it's been.
And so the one thing I want to
suggest to you is that unless
you've created the context yourself,
or unless you know that everyone
in your application is coordinating
the use of this context,
it's a shared resource,
and so you should be
defensive when using it.
And so in particular,
if you set the text matrix properly,
in general that corresponds to the
identity transform for the text matrix,
then you're assured that the measurements
that you took from CoreText are
going to correspond to what actually
gets drawn by Quartz in the end.
So it's very easy to do.
It's one call.
But it's just good defensive programming.
And finally,
if you are making use of the glyph run,
individual run objects
when dealing with glyphs,
don't assume that there's a one-to-one
mapping of characters to glyphs.
I know this is preaching to
the choir for many of you,
but the result is not
always a one-to-one mapping.
Even in English text, for instance,
when dealing with ligatures,
we have a case where there's not always
exactly one glyph for each character.
And so when dealing with a run,
you should just be careful when you're
dealing with it to ensure that you're
not assuming that there is that mapping,
and things will get along just great.
So with this overview of CoreText,
I think you have the bulk of
the knowledge that you need
in order to go off and try
using it in your applications.
And in fact,
we encourage you to just give it a try.
See if you like it.
Maybe there's a problem that you
have a bunch of code for and you have
some extra time in your schedule,
and you can try it out with
CoreText and see if things
are easier or faster for you.
And so we encourage you to do so.
We've tried to make something
for you that is fun to use,
frankly,
because it's so easy and so fast.
We think you'll have the opportunity
to be a lot more playful in what you
do with text in your application.
And we've had fun making it,
and we certainly hope that
you enjoy taking a look at it.
And now that we've made it public to you,
we encourage your feedback,
and we'd like to know what
else you need from us in order
to make a great application.
So the astute among you may
have noticed that there was one
hole I left in the application.
And that was where to get
that font that I stuck in my
attributed string earlier on.
And so in order to talk about the font
objects available in CoreText and the
unified font architecture in CoreText,
I'd like to invite
Julio back up on stage.
Thank you.
Thank you, Ned.
That was great.
Hopefully you can see why we're so
excited about CoreText layout and
especially how simple it is to use.
So before I talk to you about CT font,
I want to give you a little
rundown of all the font references
that we have in Mac OS X.
Yeah, a little overwhelming, isn't it?
But anyhow, it isn't that bad.
At the lower level, we have ATS font,
and that is your primitive font
reference to access any font data.
Then on top of that, we have CG font,
which is you need one of these
references if you need to draw text.
It's a primitive font reference.
Typically, it encapsulates an ATS font,
and new in Leopard,
you can also deal with PDF fonts as well.
On this side of the screen,
I have what I call the
classic references,
references that predate Mac OS X,
the FM font and the font family.
An FM font is,
you can think of it pretty much
the same as an ATS font reference,
whereas the FM font family is
a collection of these fonts as
defined by the FOND resource.
Now, we have an ATS font family,
which is also, think of it the same
as an FM font family.
I want to point this out here
at this point because being that
Quickdraw is not available in 64-bit,
and architecture allows both
64-bit and 32-bit applications
to be running at once.
So,
it is very likely that you're going to,
if you're a 64-bit app,
that you're going to be
dealing with a 32-bit app that
has the old font references.
So, I said Quickdraw is dead for 64-bit,
and it is,
but there's a few APIs that still live.
And those APIs are those that
I'll talk about in a minute.
On this side of the screen,
I have what I call the
classic references,
references that predate Mac OS X,
the FM font family.
An FM font family, which is also,
think of it the same
as an ATS font family.
And those APIs are those that allow
you to convert from the old FM font
references to the new font references,
or to the ATS font references,
so that you can still operate with them.
Finally,
there is the ATSU font reference,
and the ATSU font reference is
essentially the same as an FM font.
They can be used interchangeably.
On this side of the screen we have the
new font references native to Mac OS X.
So you see the NS font and
then the NS font descriptor and
sitting right below it you see the
CT font and CD font descriptor.
I'm not going to get too
much into it right now.
I will talk to them as
I talk about CT font.
One of the features of
these font references,
when you compare them with
the old font references,
is that they do encapsulate
a lot of information.
They're not just in the
old font references,
they're just basically the same
as the primitive font references.
So the new font reference,
you get a lot of that
comes along with them.
And there are some things that you
need to be aware of as you use them.
So let's go into CoreText font.
As I said at the beginning of the talk,
one of the feedback that we received from
you is that font references were complex,
you needed something more unified.
So that's what we set out
to do with CoreText font.
We took a look at the old FM font APIs,
the ATS font APIs,
what Cocoa had to offer,
but also we looked internally
at what we did for our layout
engines and took into consideration
feedback that we received from you.
And we created a unified
API for you to use,
an API where you can feel that everything
that you need to do for text drawing,
you can stick within this API.
No need to go from one API to the other.
And the same with the font types.
If you have a CT font,
there should be no reason for you to make
a call to get an ATS font reference or an
FM font reference to get your job done.
Everything that you need to do,
you should be able to do with CT font.
And finally,
one of the great things about
CoreText font is that it's
a very easy to use font.
One of the goals that I set at the
beginning of the talk was to help
our Carvin developers move away from
Quickdraw into the world of Mac OS X or
the way things have looked in Mac OS X.
All with the old way of looking
at font families and the way
Quickdraw looks at fonts.
And now you get the same view,
they can get the same view as the
Cocoa developers have in the past.
So as I talked about CoreText font,
you will notice all the similarities
with the font Cocoa API.
So to start with,
we have the font reference,
CT font reference.
That, you can think of a font reference
as a very specific font instance,
much more so than an ATS font ref,
which is a pointer into a,
or a reference to a face
or a strike in the font.
With this one,
you can specify more things,
such as a point size.
If you're dealing with fonts that,
multiple master fonts that
have variation information,
you can specify more things.
You can specify that information
into the font reference.
Also, if you want to create a font
reference for a particular
font that has a font feature,
you can also do so.
So it is quite specific.
Think of it as the reference that
you will use to draw text or to
find very specific information
about the text at that point size.
So there are many or we have many
ways to create this font references.
Here's just a sample.
There's more than these.
At the top, CT font create with font
descriptor is the preferred
way to create font references.
As I haven't talked
about font descriptors,
I'll talk about them in a little bit and
we'll see why they're the preferred way.
Now, the next three APIs that I have for
you are what I call conversion APIs.
It is inevitable that as you deal
with all the layers in the system,
you're going to be handed
font references that are not
CT font or an NS font reference.
So, for example,
if you get a Post-Crit name,
you can use CT font create with name.
If you're given an ATS font ref,
you can call CT font
create with platform font.
Or if you're dealing
with an old Carbon API,
you likely will be provided with a
Quickdraw font reference of some sort.
Be it the Quickdraw font family
name or a font family and a style.
So you can create a font
reference using those as well.
But the last API is a sample of
an API that I want to point out.
It gives added value to the font API,
the new font API.
CT font create UI font for language.
With this API, when you call it,
you will get a font right
away that has the UI.
The UI font for the application
you're using and the
localization that you're using.
This is something that in the past,
I know Carbon developers couldn't
do in any of the font APIs.
They would have to query HIToolbox
to get what the appropriate font was.
So now you can see a sample of
an API that's really putting
everything into one spot.
So you don't have to go to
different layers to get things done.
Also, CT font provides a brand
new set of functionality.
As I told you before,
we looked at what we do internally for
our layout engines and things that you
had asked us to make available to you.
These APIs, we have a set of APIs such as
APIs for getting line metrics,
getting encoding information,
language information, glyph information,
character to glyph mapping.
All these APIs were,
a lot of them were private or not
available in any of the other API sets.
And what these APIs are,
you can think of them
as font abstractions.
In the past,
what you would have had to do was
go to the low-level access APIs,
query the font tables, or even worse,
if you know how to deal
with PostScript fonts,
you would go dig through the
PostScript font to find the
information that you had.
So now we have a nice set of APIs that
give you all this functionality.
Now, another nice feature of CT font
is its font cascading mechanism.
For those of you that know Atsui,
think of font cascading
as font substitution.
It is basically a better
font substitution mechanism.
It is more trade-aware.
What do we mean by that?
It pays a lot more attention
to font characteristics.
At the bottom, we have a sample here of
what Atsui and CoreText do.
You see the first line,
both Atsui and CoreText do
the same font substitution.
For the Japanese text.
Whereas in the second one,
I don't know if you
can see the difference,
but CoreText picks a Japanese font that
matches the Serfs in the base Roman font.
And Atsui doesn't do that.
In the last line,
we have a sample where Atsui does
not know that the base Roman font
is not bold and CoreText does.
So it tries a bit harder than
Atsui to figure out what the
right font to substitute is.
The nice thing about this is
that you get this for free.
As long as you use one of the
APIs that Ned talked about,
the CT line draw or the CT frame draw,
you'll get this functionality for free.
You have an attributed string that is
just basically a bunch of Unicodes,
it'll do the right thing for you.
It'll do the substitution.
Now, for those of you that
need to go deeper down,
as Ned said,
there's the glyph run functionality
in CoreText font layout.
If you need to go at that level,
you probably will need to get the same
algorithm for font substitution that we
use for CT line draw and CT frame draw.
So for those,
you can use CT font create for string
and you will get the same functionality.
Next, the font descriptors.
So now you can start to see the parallels
that we have with the Cocoa APIs.
Font descriptors are great.
This is something that Carbon developers
did not have in their arsenal at all.
You can think of them as a
query into the font system.
And this query, you can have,
it's basically a
dictionary of attributes.
And here's a sample of some
of the attributes you can pass
to create a font descriptor.
So it can be very specific or very loose.
So some of the samples of the attributes
that you can pass are postscript name,
family name, style name, such as bold,
or traits.
So you can say,
give me a font descriptor of all
the monospace fonts in the system.
It will do that for you.
Now, one thing I want to point out,
if you notice when we were
talking about the font references,
in the modern references,
we don't have a family reference.
Well, there is no need for a
family reference in Mac OS X,
in the CT font world.
You have a font descriptor.
You can basically create a
font descriptor that says,
"Give me a font descriptor that matches
a family name with this name." And boom,
you have your family built for you.
Lastly, there is persistent storage
with font descriptors,
and I will talk to you
about some sample code.
Here is some sample code on how to
go about creating a font descriptor.
First,
you assume that we have a font name,
a CFString with a font name,
but likely a PostScript name, and a size.
You call ctfontDescriptor,
create with name and size,
and you're given a font descriptor.
In order to obtain a font reference,
the next thing you do is you just call
ctfontCreate with font descriptor,
and there's two optional
parameters that you can pass here.
I decided to pass this
point size and a matrix.
The point size,
I passed zero because when
I created the font descriptor,
I already specified a size,
so I choose to ignore it.
And then I also choose
to ignore the matrix.
I'm not going to touch that.
And I did include a CF release,
which Ned didn't include in his slides.
I did have some more space.
And here's where we go about
creating or storing font references.
Remember,
I told you that the preferred way to
create a... font descriptors or font
references was using font descriptors.
And the reason for that is because
we also recommend that you use font
descriptors as persistent storage.
So let's assume that you're working
with a document and you were
using a particular font reference,
one of your fonts.
So you want to now save out
your document out to disk.
How do you go about storing
that font reference?
Well,
the first thing you do is you obtain
a descriptor for that reference.
So you call ctfontDescriptor.
You get the descriptor.
The next, you call ctfontdescriptor
copy attributes.
What this does for you,
it gives you a dictionary of attributes,
and it's the minimal set of attributes
in this dictionary that it takes
to create this font descriptor.
So that's what you go ahead...
You can then go ahead,
serialize, and put in your document.
Finally, in the CT font API,
we have font collections,
much like in the Cocoa APIs.
You can think of font collections
as just unions or font descriptors.
So you can create a font
collection for all your bold fonts,
all your italic fonts, whatever.
Font collections fit into the
realm more of font management.
So it's not a lot of use
to most of you folks here,
but font collections do offer something
that you all need in your applications,
and that is enumeration.
There is an API in font collections
to obtain all the fonts that
are available in the system.
And as part of that,
you can specify that you don't want
to have any duplicates returned
to you in this font collection.
Also, a neat feature of this is that when
you extract the font descriptor
from the font collection,
you can get a callback or pass a
callback that lets you sort the way
the descriptors are returned to you.
So, it gives you a lot of flexibility.
You can get it whatever way you want.
If you want to have a
list of font families,
you can have your sorting algorithm
that lists them by font family.
So, as you can see,
the new CT font API parallels
a lot what is in Cocoa,
and that is very intentional.
We wanted to give Carbon developers
the same access that the
Cocoa developers had in their APIs.
We did take a look at
what was in the old APIs,
what was in new APIs,
took a look at what was
best from those APIs,
and gave you a little extra in those
private APIs that we had been using
in the past that were not available.
available to you.
Before I go, I want to,
just like Ned did,
I want to give you some
pointers about CT fonts.
Like I said,
create fonts from font descriptors.
The reason is once you
create a font descriptor,
think of the font descriptor
as the result of a query.
So you've done some work already
and it is quite fast to go from
a font descriptor to a font.
And then the other thing is, like I said,
the preferred way to store your font
reference is using font descriptors.
So go ahead, extract the attributes out
of the font descriptor and
serialize those out to this.
Finally, like Ned mentioned with the
framesetters and the typesetter objects,
with the CT font reference,
it's something that
you want to hang on to.
Like I said, these references encapsulate
a lot of information.
For sure you can imagine
there is a CG font ref.
There is a lot of information that
it carries around so you never
have to go to another API set or
API type to get what you need done.
So hold on to it.
It's good for performance.
And once you're done, yeah,
go ahead and release it.
Finally,
use our font cascading mechanism.
I say this for two reasons.
One, font substitution is
really expensive to do,
and we've taken great -- gone through
great lengths to optimize it so
that it performs well with a small
number of fonts that we have and
with large amount of fonts installed.
But more importantly,
we want to provide a consistent
experience for our users.
Now, you can tell me at this point,
"Well, you didn't do that when you showed
me the Atsui example." Well,
that's going to change.
It is certainly our goal for Leopard that
every layer in the system will have or
experience the same font substitution.
And finally, something that we've
said in previous WWDCs,
and that is rely on our font APIs.
This goes for both the CT font
or any other APIs that we have.
And I say this again because
it is expensive to go
looking through font data,
and it might seem fine to you when
you try to do something on your own,
and you're working with the standard set
of fonts that would ship with the system.
But the moment somebody drops two, three,
four, 8,000 fonts into the system,
it's going to look very ugly.
So, just want to point out
some more information here.
Two things from this slide
that I want to point out.
We've created a new mailing list,
CoreText Dev.
I checked two hours ago and
it's still not up and running,
but it should be up and
running fairly soon.
And it's a great place for you to
give us feedback regarding CoreText.
Next is documentation.
We have no online
documentation of CoreText yet.
It's been written as we speak.
However,
the headers are very well documented.
All the APIs, all the parameters,
all the attributes that you need
to use are very well documented.
And also, they're very well organized.
All the classes, if you will,
that we had, the typesetter,
the framesetter, CT font,
the font reference,
it's all in its own header.
So, it should be fairly easy for you to
go dig through information there.
Labs, following this session at noon,
we will have a Cortex lab.
So if you want to get your hands dirty,
you want to talk more about it,
we'll be there to assist you.
Following the Cortex lab,
there will be the AppKit lab.
And if you have questions
regarding Tex and Cocoa,
please attend that.
There will be somebody there to help you.
Tomorrow,
we have the Tex Internationalization Lab.
So if you have questions
regarding Unicode,
input methods, localization of some sort,
If you have further
questions about Cortex,
some of us will be there
to assist you as well.
Finally, I want to drive some
points before you leave.
was developed with a lot of
Carbon developers in mind.
We really wanted to get
you out of using Quickdraw,
but we knew that you didn't have
a really good avenue to do so.
We feel that with Cortex we have done so.
So it's really, really time.
You know,
we've been telling you for the past
few years to get rid of Quickdraw.
I mean, now you've seen the
right end of the wall.
It's not even in 64-bit.
There'll be less and less support
for Quickdraw as time goes along.
So go take a serious look at Cortex
if you're a Carbon developer.
Next.
CoreText is the low-level framework.
And if you remember the first slides
that I had on text architecture,
we had the base frameworks,
ATS and Quartz.
And on top, we had Cocoa and Carbon.
CoreText is sitting right
there in the middle.
All our text system depends on it.
Performance for our text
system depends on it.
We've done a great job creating
a framework that is really,
really good, works well,
and performs really well.
So if you are thinking about
moving your code to CoreText,
we're pretty confident that
we can accomplish the same
things for your code as well.
Finally, CoreText is brand new.
It's not set in stone.
Go ahead and take a look at the APIs.
Give us some feedback.
When we designed CoreText, yes,
we had performance in mind.
We had Carbon developers in mind.
And internally, we had internal needs
that we needed to fulfill.
So we built the API based
on all that information,
but we know that we're
going to miss stuff.
We need to hear from you.
There's stuff missing?
Let us know.
There's stuff that quite
doesn't work for you?
Let us know.
Make use of that list as soon as it's up.
Or talk to your developer relations
person and get that information for us.
We're all ears.